Title: Mo(o)re(--Sloan) fun with Academic Lineage
Date: 2014-10-09
Category: daily
Tags: jevin, sandra, msdse, eigenfactor

While we were at the Moore--Sloan Data Science Environments community build, [Jevin West](http://r.halper.in/coauth/jevin) continued our work analyzing academic lineage with Myria.

On the citation graph we're using, [InfoMap](http://www.mapequation.org/code.html) identifies 5,292 unique paper clusters. For each cluster, we took the top paper rated by [Eigenfactor](http://www.eigenfactor.org/) and fed these 5,292 papers as the seed set for the Least Common Ancestor (LCA) query which we ran on Myria. The [query itself](https://demo.myria.cs.washington.edu/queries?max=35111&limit=1) took a little over 4 hours, but it finished successfully.

Of the nearly 14 million pairs of papers, 7.1M of them have a common ancestor--a hit rate of about 50%.  Among these 7.1M LCAs, here are the ten most frequent papers (and their frequencies):

1. (47,129) _Some Methods for Strengthening the Common 𝝌<sup>2</sup> Tests_ (Cochran, 1954)
1. (35,585) _The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism_ (Trivers, 1971)
1. (34,195) _On the Mathematical Foundations of Theoretical Statistics_ (Fisher, 1922)
1. (34,093) _The Tragedy of the Commons_ (Hardin, 1968)
1. (32,067) _Some Difficulties of the Determination Problem_ (Harrison, 1933)
1. (29,458) _Diverse Doctrines of Evolution, Their Relation to the Practice of Science and of Life_ (Jennings, 1927)
1. (28,149) _An Analysis of Transformations_ (Box, 1964)
1. (26,000) _Fitting the Negative Binomial Distribution to Biological Data_ (Bliss, 1953)
1. (25,410) _A Method for Cluster Analysis_ (Edwards, 1965)
1. (24,611, 0.34% or 1 in 289 of the results) _A Theory of the Allocation of Time_ (Becker, 1965)

We hope to dig into this more next week, but looking at the results is already pretty fascinating:

* These papers are generally highly cited, but (paraphrasing Jevin) may not be currently recognized as the very top according to standard citation metrics.
* The time range is pretty interesting -- early to mid 20th century all around.
* Mathematics and statistics seems to dominate this part of the list. We do see some more fundamental life science papers nearby, the first of which is _The Gene_ (Goldschmidt, 1928) at #17.
* The top hit represents 0.66%, or 1 in 151 of the results, and the 10th hit represents 0.34% or 1 in 289 of the results.
* And, of course, I have not directly come across any of these papers in my work, but I should go read them!

What are your thoughts: Do you recognize these papers? Have you read them? What else should we think about?